The following content is provided under a Creative
Commons license.
Your support will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources for free.
To make a donation or view additional materials from
hundreds of MIT courses, visit MIT OpenCourseWare at
ocw.mit.edu.
Hi.
As you recall, last time we developed the discrete time
Fourier transform.
And one of the issues that I alluded to, although I didn't
say it explicitly, is that the Fourier transform doesn't
exist for all sequences.
In fact, as we'll see today, one of the difficulties is the
issue of convergence.
That is, the Fourier transform doesn't converge for all
sequences.
And to get around this, we'll generalize the notion of the
Fourier transform as we introduced it last time to
what's called the Z-transform.
The Z-transform being the discrete time counterpart of
the Laplace transform for continuous time systems.
Well, let me begin by examining just a little this
issue of convergence.
We have here the Fourier transform relationship as we
developed it last time, x of e to the j omega given by the
sum of x of n times e to the minus j omega n.
And as we discussed the Fourier transform last time, we
assumed that the sum was convergent.
And or at least we didn't particularly raise the issue as
to whether it is or isn't.
Well, we can look at the magnitude of x or equivalently
the magnitude of this sum and ask under what conditions this
sum will converge, that is, under what conditions will this
sum be finite?
Well, here we have the magnitude of a sum of things
from what's called the triangle inequality, or you can just
kind of imagine that this is true from common sense, is
that the magnitude of a sum has to be less than or equal to
the sum of the magnitudes.
So the magnitude of this sum has to be less than or equal
to the sum of the magnitude of x of n e to the minus j omega
n.
The magnitude of a product is the product of
the magnitudes, of course.
So this says that the magnitude of the Fourier
transform has to be less than or equal to the sum of the
magnitude of x of n times the magnitude of the complex
exponential e to the minus j omega n.
Well, this, of course, we can't say a lot about.
This we can recognize as unity.
It's a complex exponential.
The magnitude of a complex exponential is 1.
So consequently, the magnitude of the Fourier transform is
less than or equal to the sum of the magnitudes of x of n,
summed over minus infinity, n equals minus infinity to plus
infinity.
Well, that tells us then that the Fourier transform will
converge, converge meaning that the sum ends up finite.
If this converges, that is, certainly if this sum is finite,
then the magnitude of x of e to the j omega is finite.
So we can say that x of e to the j omega, the Fourier
transform, converges if the sum of the magnitude of x of n
is less than infinity.
Well, this is a condition that's commonly referred to as
absolutely summable.
The condition is that the sequence x of n be absolutely
summable.
The way we've gone through this, the statement is that if x
of n is absolutely summable, then the Fourier transform
converges under some sorts of conditions.
And depending on how you interpret convergence,
this can be modified somewhat.
But basically, and that in fact is discussed in some detail
in the text, but basically the condition for convergence of
the Fourier transform is that the sequence whose Fourier
transform we're talking about be absolutely summable.
Now, we've seen a sum like this someplace else.
In fact, a couple of lectures ago, we talked about
stability of discrete time systems.
And the statement about stability was that the unit
sample response of the system be absolutely summable.
That is, or it was, that if the unit sample response is
absolutely summable, then the system is stable.
So one conclusion, which you should tuck away for now and
we'll be bringing into play later on in this lecture, is
that a stable system implies that the frequency response or
the Fourier transform of the unit sample response converges.
So this is convergence then.
And we can look at a couple of examples just to see how this
looks in some specific cases.
Let's first of all take the example of the sequence x of n
